---
title: Envisioning a future where health care tech leaves some behind
description: The winning essay of the Envisioning the Future of Computing Prize puts
  health care disparities at the forefront.
pubDate: Mon, 09 Jun 2025 16:10:00 -0400
source: MIT
tags:
- mit
- ai
url: https://news.mit.edu/2025/envisioning-future-where-health-care-tech-leaves-some-behind-0609
---

Will the perfect storm of potentially life-changing, artificial intelligence-driven health care and the desire to increase profits through subscription models alienate vulnerable patients?
For the third year in a row, MIT's Envisioning the Future of Computing Prize asked students to describe, in 3,000 words or fewer, how advancements in computing could shape human society for the better or worse. All entries were eligible to win a number of cash prizes.
Inspired by recent research on the greater effect microbiomes have on overall health, MIT-WHOI Joint Program in Oceanography and Applied Ocean Science and Engineering PhD candidate Annaliese Meyer created the concept of “B-Bots,” a synthetic bacterial mimic designed to regulate gut biomes and activated by Bluetooth.
For the contest, which challenges MIT students to articulate their musings for what a future driven by advances in computing holds, Meyer submitted a work of speculative fiction about how recipients of a revolutionary new health-care technology find their treatment in jeopardy with the introduction of a subscription-based pay model.
In her winning paper, titled “(Pre/Sub)scribe,” Meyer chronicles the usage of B-Bots from the perspective of both their creator and a B-Bots user named Briar. They celebrate the effects of the supplement, helping them manage vitamin deficiencies and chronic conditions like acid reflux and irritable bowel syndrome. Meyer says that the introduction of a B-Bots subscription model “seemed like a perfect opportunity to hopefully make clear that in a for-profit health-care system, even medical advances that would, in theory, be revolutionary for human health can end up causing more harm than good for the many people on the losing side of the massive wealth disparity in modern society.” Meyer also states that these opinions are her own and do not reflect any official stances of affiliated institutions.
As a Canadian, Meyer has experienced the differences between the health care systems in the United States and Canada. She recounts her mother’s recent cancer treatments, emphasizing the cost and coverage of treatments in British Columbia when compared to the U.S.
Aside from a cautionary tale of equity in the American health care system, Meyer hopes readers take away an additional scientific message on the complexity of gut microbiomes. Inspired by her thesis work in ocean metaproteomics, Meyer says, “I think a lot about when and why microbes produce different proteins to adapt to environmental changes, and how that depends on the rest of the microbial community and the exchange of metabolic products between organisms.”
Meyer had hoped to participate in the previous year’s contest, but the time constraints of her lab work put her submission on hold. Now in the midst of thesis work, she saw the contest as a way to add some variety to what she was writing while keeping engaged with her scientific interests. However, writing has always been a passion. “I wrote a lot as a kid (‘author’ actually often preceded ‘scientist’ as my dream job while I was in elementary school), and I still write fiction in my spare time,” she says.
Named the winner of the $10,000 grand prize, Meyer says the essay and presentation preparation were extremely rewarding.
“The chance to explore a new topic area which, though related to my field, was definitely out of my comfort zone, really pushed me as a writer and a scientist. It got me reading papers I’d never have found before, and digging into concepts that I’d barely ever encountered. (Did I have any real understanding of the patent process prior to this? Absolutely not.) The presentation dinner itself was a ton of fun; it was great to both be able to celebrate with my friends and colleagues as well as meet people from a bunch of different fields and departments around MIT.”
Envisioning the future of the computing prize
Co-sponsored by the Social and Ethical Responsibilities of Computing (SERC), a cross-cutting initiative of the MIT Schwarzman College of Computing and the School of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences (SHASS), with support from MAC3 Philanthropies, the contest this year attracted 65 submissions from undergraduate and graduate students across various majors, including brain and cognitive sciences, economics, electrical engineering and computer science, physics, anthropology, and others.
Caspar Hare, associate dean of SERC and professor of philosophy, launched the prize in 2023. He says that the object of the prize was “to encourage MIT students to think about what they’re doing, not just in terms of advancing computing-related technologies, but also in terms of how the decisions they make may or may not work to our collective benefit.”
He emphasized that the Envisioning the Future of Computing prize will continue to remain “interesting and important” to the MIT community. There are plans in place to tweak next year’s contest, offering more opportunities for workshops and guidance for those interested in submitting essays.
“Everyone is excited to continue this for as long as it remains relevant, which could be forever,” he says, suggesting that in years to come the prize could give us a series of historical snapshots of what computing-related technologies MIT students found most compelling.
“Computing-related technology is going to be transforming and changing the world. MIT students will remain a big part of that.”
Crowning a winner
As part of a two-stage evaluation process, all the submitted essays were reviewed anonymously by a committee of faculty members from the college, SHASS, and the Department of Urban Studies and Planning. The judges moved forward three finalists based on the papers that were deemed to be the most articulate, thorough, grounded, imaginative, and inspiring.
In early May, a live awards ceremony was held where the finalists were invited to give 20-minute presentations on their entries and took questions from the audience. Nearly 140 MIT community members, family members, and friends attended the ceremony in support of the finalists. The audience members and judging panel asked the presenters challenging and thoughtful questions on the societal impact of their fictional computing technologies.
A final tally, which comprised 75 percent of their essay score and 25 percent of their presentation score, determined the winner.
This year’s judging panel included:
- Marzyeh Ghassemi, associate professor, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and Institute for Medical Engineering and Science;
- Caspar Hare, associate dean of SERC and professor of philosophy;
- Jason Jackson, associate professor in political economy and urban planning;
- Brad Skow, professor of philosophy;
- Armando Solar-Lezama, Distinguished Professor of Computing; and
- Nikos Trichakis, associate dean of SERC and J.C. Penney Associate Professor of Management.
The judges also awarded $5,000 to the two runners-up: Martin Staadecker, a graduate student in the Technology and Policy Program in the Institute for Data, Systems, and Society, for his essay on a fictional token-based system to track fossil fuels, and Juan Santoyo, a PhD candidate in the Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, for his short story of a field-deployed AI designed to help the mental health of soldiers in times of conflict. In addition, eight honorable mentions were recognized, with each receiving a cash prize of $1,000.