---
title: 'Genie 2: A large-scale foundation world model'
description: Generating unlimited diverse training environments for future general
  agents
summary: Generating unlimited diverse training environments for future general agents
pubDate: Wed, 04 Dec 2024 14:23:00 +0000
source: DeepMind Blog
tags:
- deepmind
- alpha
- ai
url: https://deepmind.google/discover/blog/genie-2-a-large-scale-foundation-world-model/
thumbnail: https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/wvcJdqh_wddVc-WiMGgcqe7nWp7Ybu0wd-PBDxC_VUQkfxI7HPfQz3fi_HyYTOoRM_XV3Bofp9l1wBZ1CJPZPG6yZMdZxqH8X7_Lb9nhVAquAul1=w528-h297-n-nu-rw
---

Research
Genie 2: A large-scale foundation world model
Generating unlimited diverse training environments for future general agents
Today we introduce Genie 2, a foundation world model capable of generating an endless variety of action-controllable, playable 3D environments for training and evaluating embodied agents. Based on a single prompt image, it can be played by a human or AI agent using keyboard and mouse inputs.
Games play a key role in the world of artificial intelligence (AI) research. Their engaging nature, unique blend of challenges, and measurable progress make them ideal environments to safely test and advance AI capabilities.
Indeed, games have been important to Google DeepMind since our founding. From our early work with Atari games, breakthroughs such as AlphaGo and AlphaStar, to our research on generalist agents in collaboration with game developers, games have been center stage in our research. However, training more general embodied agents has been traditionally bottlenecked by the availability of sufficiently rich and diverse training environments.
As we show, Genie 2 could enable future agents to be trained and evaluated in a limitless curriculum of novel worlds. Our research also paves the way for new, creative workflows for prototyping interactive experiences.
Emergent capabilities of a foundation world model
Until now, world models have largely been confined to modeling narrow domains. In Genie 1, we introduced an approach for generating a diverse array of 2D worlds. Today we introduce Genie 2, which represents a significant leap forward in generality. Genie 2 can generate a vast diversity of rich 3D worlds.
Genie 2 is a world model, meaning it can simulate virtual worlds, including the consequences of taking any action (e.g. jump, swim, etc.). It was trained on a large-scale video dataset and, like other generative models, demonstrates various emergent capabilities at scale, such as object interactions, complex character animation, physics, and the ability to model and thus predict the behavior of other agents.
Below are example videos of people interacting with Genie 2. For every example, the model is prompted with a single image generated by Imagen 3, GDM’s state-of-the-art text-to-image model. This means anyone can describe a world they want in text, select their favorite rendering of that idea, and then step into and interact with that newly created world (or have an AI agent be trained or evaluated in it). At each step, a person or agent provides a keyboard and mouse action, and Genie 2 simulates the next observation. Genie 2 can generate consistent worlds for up to a minute, with the majority of examples shown lasting 10-20s.
Action controls
Genie 2 responds intelligently to actions taken by pressing keys on a keyboard, identifying the character and moving it correctly. For example, our model has to figure out that arrow keys should move the robot and not the trees or clouds.
Generating counterfactuals
We can generate diverse trajectories from the same starting frame, which means it is possible to simulate counterfactual experiences for training agents. In each row, each video starts from the same frame, but has different actions taken by a human player.
Long horizon memory
Genie 2 is capable of remembering parts of the world that are no longer in view and then rendering them accurately when they become observable again.
Long video generation with new generated content
Genie 2 generates new plausible content on the fly and maintains a consistent world for up to a minute.
Diverse environments
Genie 2 can create different perspectives, such as first-person view, isometric views, or third person driving videos.
3D structures
Genie 2 learned to create complex 3D visual scenes.
Object affordances and interactions
Genie 2 models various object interactions, such as bursting balloons, opening doors, and shooting barrels of explosives.
Character animation
Genie 2 learned how to animate various types of characters doing different activities.
NPCs
Genie 2 models other agents and even complex interactions with them.
Physics
Genie 2 models water effects.
Smoke
Genie 2 models smoke effects.
Gravity
Genie 2 models gravity.
Lighting
Genie 2 models point and directional lighting.
Reflections
Genie 2 models reflections, bloom and coloured lighting.
Playing from real world images
Genie 2 can also be prompted with real world images, where we see that it can model grass blowing in the wind or water flowing in a river.
Genie 2 enables rapid prototyping
Genie 2 makes it easy to rapidly prototype diverse interactive experiences, enabling researchers to quickly experiment with novel environments to train and test embodied AI agents.
For example, below we prompt Genie 2 with different images generated by Imagen 3 to model the difference between flying a paper plane, a dragon, a hawk, or a parachute and test how well Genie can animate different avatars.
Thanks to Genie 2's out-of-distribution generalization capabilities, concept art and drawings can be turned into fully interactive environments. This enables artists and designers to prototype quickly, which can bootstrap the creative process for environment design, further accelerating research.
Here we show examples of research environment concepts made by our concept artist.
AI agents acting inside the world model
By using Genie 2 to quickly create rich and diverse environments for AI agents, our researchers can also generate evaluation tasks that agents have not seen during training. Below, we show examples of a SIMA agent that we developed in collaboration with games developers, following instructions on unseen environments synthesized by Genie 2 via a single image prompt.
The SIMA agent is designed to complete tasks in a range of 3D game worlds by following natural-language instructions. Here we used Genie 2 to generate a 3D environment with two doors, a blue and a red one, and provided instructions to the SIMA agent to open each of them. In this example, SIMA is controlling the avatar via keyboard and mouse inputs, while Genie 2 generates the game frames.
We can also use SIMA to help evaluate Genie 2’s capabilities. Here we test Genie 2’s ability to generate consistent environments by instructing SIMA to look around and explore behind the house.
While this research is still in its early stage with substantial room for improvement on both agent and environment generation capabilities, we believe Genie 2 is the path to solving a structural problem of training embodied agents safely while achieving the breadth and generality required to progress towards AGI.
Diffusion world model
Genie 2 is an autoregressive latent diffusion model, trained on a large video dataset. After passing through an autoencoder, latent frames from the video are passed to a large transformer dynamics model, trained with a causal mask similar to that used by large language models.
At inference time, Genie 2 can be sampled in an autoregressive fashion, taking individual actions and past latent frames on a frame-by-frame basis. We use classifier-free guidance to improve action controllability.
The samples in this blog post are generated by an undistilled base model, to show what is possible. We can play a distilled version in real-time with a reduction in quality of the outputs.
Developing our technologies responsibly
Genie 2 shows the potential of foundational world models for creating diverse 3D environments and accelerating agent research. This research direction is in its early stages and we look forward to continuing to improve Genie’s world generation capabilities in terms of generality and consistency.
As with SIMA, our research is building towards more general AI systems and agents that can understand and safely carry out a wide range of tasks in a way that is helpful to people online and in the real world.
Interesting outtakes
Acknowledgements
Genie 2 was led by Jack Parker-Holder with technical leadership by Stephen Spencer, with key contributions from Philip Ball, Jake Bruce, Vibhavari Dasagi, Kristian Holsheimer, Christos Kaplanis, Alexandre Moufarek, Guy Scully, Jeremy Shar, Jimmy Shi and Jessica Yung, and contributions from Michael Dennis, Sultan Kenjeyev and Shangbang Long. Yusuf Aytar, Jeff Clune, Sander Dieleman, Doug Eck, Shlomi Fruchter, Raia Hadsell, Demis Hassabis, Georg Ostrovski, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Nicolas Heess, Charles Blundell, Simon Osindero, Rushil Mistry gave advice. Past contributors include Ashley Edwards and Richie Steigerwald.
The Generalist Agents team was led by Vlad Mnih with key contributions from Harris Chan, Maxime Gazeau, Bonnie Li, Fabio Pardo, Luyu Wang, Lei Zhang
The SIMA team, with particular support from Frederic Besse, Tim Harley, Anna Mitenkova and Jane Wang
Tim Rocktäschel, Satinder Singh and Adrian Bolton coordinated, managed and advised the overall project.
We’d also like to thank Zoubin Gharamani, Andy Brock, Ed Hirst, David Bridson, Zeb Mehring, Cassidy Hardin, Hyunjik Kim, Noah Fiedel, Jeff Stanway, Petko Yotov, Mihai Tiuca, Soheil Hassas Yeganeh, Nehal Mehta, Richard Tucker, Tim Brooks, Alex Cullum, Max Cant, Nik Hemmings, Richard Evans, Valeria Oliveira, Yanko Gitahy Oliveira, Bethanie Brownfield, Charles Gbadamosi, Giles Ruscoe, Guy Simmons, Jony Hudson, Marjorie Limont, Nathaniel Wong, Sarah Chakera, Nick Young.