---
title: Generating audio for video
description: Video-to-audio research uses video pixels and text prompts to generate
  rich soundtracks
pubDate: Mon, 17 Jun 2024 16:00:00 +0000
source: DeepMind Blog
tags:
- deepmind
- alpha
- ai
url: https://deepmind.google/discover/blog/generating-audio-for-video/
---

Research
Generating audio for video
Video-to-audio research uses video pixels and text prompts to generate rich soundtracks
Video generation models are advancing at an incredible pace, but many current systems can only generate silent output. One of the next major steps toward bringing generated movies to life is creating soundtracks for these silent videos.
Today, we're sharing progress on our video-to-audio (V2A) technology, which makes synchronized audiovisual generation possible. V2A combines video pixels with natural language text prompts to generate rich soundscapes for the on-screen action.
Our V2A technology is pairable with video generation models like Veo to create shots with a dramatic score, realistic sound effects or dialogue that matches the characters and tone of a video.
It can also generate soundtracks for a range of traditional footage, including archival material, silent films and more — opening a wider range of creative opportunities.
Enhanced creative control
Importantly, V2A can generate an unlimited number of soundtracks for any video input. Optionally, a ‘positive prompt’ can be defined to guide the generated output toward desired sounds, or a ‘negative prompt’ to guide it away from undesired sounds.
This flexibility gives users more control over V2A’s audio output, making it possible to rapidly experiment with different audio outputs and choose the best match.
How it works
We experimented with autoregressive and diffusion approaches to discover the most scalable AI architecture, and the diffusion-based approach for audio generation gave the most realistic and compelling results for synchronizing video and audio information.
Our V2A system starts by encoding video input into a compressed representation. Then, the diffusion model iteratively refines the audio from random noise. This process is guided by the visual input and natural language prompts given to generate synchronized, realistic audio that closely aligns with the prompt. Finally, the audio output is decoded, turned into an audio waveform and combined with the video data.
To generate higher quality audio and add the ability to guide the model towards generating specific sounds, we added more information to the training process, including AI-generated annotations with detailed descriptions of sound and transcripts of spoken dialogue.
By training on video, audio and the additional annotations, our technology learns to associate specific audio events with various visual scenes, while responding to the information provided in the annotations or transcripts.
Further research underway
Our research stands out from existing video-to-audio solutions because it can understand raw pixels and adding a text prompt is optional.
Also, the system doesn't need manual alignment of the generated sound with the video, which involves tediously adjusting different elements of sounds, visuals and timings.
Still, there are a number of other limitations we’re trying to address and further research is underway.
Since the quality of the audio output is dependent on the quality of the video input, artifacts or distortions in the video, which are outside the model’s training distribution, can lead to a noticeable drop in audio quality.
We’re also improving lip synchronization for videos that involve speech. V2A attempts to generate speech from the input transcripts and synchronize it with characters' lip movements. But the paired video generation model may not be conditioned on transcripts. This creates a mismatch, often resulting in uncanny lip-syncing, as the video model doesn’t generate mouth movements that match the transcript.
Our commitment to safety and transparency
We’re committed to developing and deploying AI technologies responsibly. To make sure our V2A technology can have a positive impact on the creative community, we’re gathering diverse perspectives and insights from leading creators and filmmakers, and using this valuable feedback to inform our ongoing research and development.
We’ve also incorporated our SynthID toolkit into our V2A research to watermark all AI-generated content to help safeguard against the potential for misuse of this technology.
Before we consider opening access to it to the wider public, our V2A technology will undergo rigorous safety assessments and testing. Initial results are showing this technology will become a promising approach for bringing generated movies to life.
Note: All examples are generated by our V2A technology, which is paired with Veo, our most capable generative video model.
Acknowledgements
This work was made possible by the contributions of: Ankush Gupta, Nick Pezzotti, Pavel Khrushkov, Tobenna Peter Igwe, Kazuya Kawakami, Mateusz Malinowski, Jacob Kelly, Yan Wu, Xinyu Wang, Abhishek Sharma, Ali Razavi, Eric Lau, Serena Zhang, Brendan Shillingford, Yelin Kim, Eleni Shaw, Signe Nørly, Andeep Toor, Irina Blok, Gregory Shaw, Pen Li, Scott Wisdom, Aren Jansen, Zalán Borsos, Brian McWilliams, Salah Zaiem, Marco Tagliasacchi, Ron Weiss, Manoj Plakal, Hakan Erdogan, John Hershey, Jeff Donahue, Vivek Kumar, and Matt Sharifi.
We extend our gratitude to Benigno Uria, Björn Winckler, Charlie Nash, Conor Durkan, Cătălina Cangea, David Ding, Dawid Górny, Drew Jaegle, Ethan Manilow, Evgeny Gladchenko, Felix Riedel, Florian Stimberg, Henna Nandwani, Jakob Bauer, Junlin Zhang, Luis C. Cobo, Mahyar Bordbar, Miaosen Wang, Mikołaj Bińkowski, Sander Dieleman, Will Grathwohl, Yaroslav Ganin, Yusuf Aytar, and Yury Sulsky.
Special thanks to Aäron van den Oord, Andrew Zisserman, Tom Hume, RJ Mical, Douglas Eck, Nando de Freitas, Oriol Vinyals, Eli Collins, Koray Kavukcuoglu and Demis Hassabis for their insightful guidance and support throughout the research process.
We also acknowledge the many other individuals who contributed across Google DeepMind and our partners at Google.