---
title: Ensemble Knowledge Distillation for Machine Learning Interatomic Potentials
description: "arXiv:2503.14293v3 Announce Type: replace-cross \nAbstract: The quality\
  \ of machine learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs) strongly depends on the quantity\
  \ of training data as well as the quantum chemistry (QC) level of theory used. Datasets\
  \ generated with high-fidelity QC methods are typically restricted to small molecules\
  \ and may be missing energy gradients, which make it difficult to train accurate\
  \ MLIPs. We present an ensemble knowledge distillation (EKD) method to improve MLIP\
  \ accuracy when trained to energy-only datasets. First, multiple teacher models\
  \ are trained to QC energies and then generate atomic forces for all configurations\
  \ in the dataset. Next, the student MLIP is trained to both QC energies and to ensemble-averaged\
  \ forces generated by the teacher models. We apply this workflow on the ANI-1ccx\
  \ dataset where the configuration energies computed at the coupled cluster level\
  \ of theory. The resulting student MLIPs achieve new state-of-the-art accuracy on\
  \ the COMP6 benchmark and show improved stability for molecular dynamics simulations."
pubDate: Mon, 16 Jun 2025 00:00:00 -0400
source: arXiv AI
tags:
- arxiv
- ai
- research
url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14293
---

Physics > Chemical Physics
[Submitted on 18 Mar 2025 (v1), last revised 12 Jun 2025 (this version, v3)]
Title:Ensemble Knowledge Distillation for Machine Learning Interatomic Potentials
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:The quality of machine learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs) strongly depends on the quantity of training data as well as the quantum chemistry (QC) level of theory used. Datasets generated with high-fidelity QC methods are typically restricted to small molecules and may be missing energy gradients, which make it difficult to train accurate MLIPs. We present an ensemble knowledge distillation (EKD) method to improve MLIP accuracy when trained to energy-only datasets. First, multiple teacher models are trained to QC energies and then generate atomic forces for all configurations in the dataset. Next, the student MLIP is trained to both QC energies and to ensemble-averaged forces generated by the teacher models. We apply this workflow on the ANI-1ccx dataset where the configuration energies computed at the coupled cluster level of theory. The resulting student MLIPs achieve new state-of-the-art accuracy on the COMP6 benchmark and show improved stability for molecular dynamics simulations.
Submission history
From: Sakib Matin [view email][v1] Tue, 18 Mar 2025 14:32:51 UTC (678 KB)
[v2] Wed, 19 Mar 2025 15:03:39 UTC (678 KB)
[v3] Thu, 12 Jun 2025 23:37:14 UTC (538 KB)
Current browse context:
physics.chem-ph
References & Citations
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Bibliographic Explorer (What is the Explorer?)
Connected Papers (What is Connected Papers?)
Litmaps (What is Litmaps?)
scite Smart Citations (What are Smart Citations?)
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
alphaXiv (What is alphaXiv?)
CatalyzeX Code Finder for Papers (What is CatalyzeX?)
DagsHub (What is DagsHub?)
Gotit.pub (What is GotitPub?)
Hugging Face (What is Huggingface?)
Papers with Code (What is Papers with Code?)
ScienceCast (What is ScienceCast?)
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
Influence Flower (What are Influence Flowers?)
CORE Recommender (What is CORE?)
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.